# Against Praxeas

1. In divers ways has the devil shown hostility to the Truth. At times he has tried to shake it by pretending to defend it. He is the champion of the one Lord, the Almighty, the creator of the world, so that he may make a heresy out of the unity. He says that the Father himself came down into the virgin, himself was born of her, himself suffered, in short himself is Jesus Christ. The serpent has forgotten himself: for when he tempted Jesus Christ after the baptism of John it was as Son of God that he attacked him, being assured that God has a son at least from those very scriptures out of which he was then constructing the temptation : If thou art the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread : again, If thou art the Son of God cast thyself down from hence, for it is written that he \- the Father, of course - hath given his angels charge concerning thee, that in their hands they should bear thee up, lest in any place thou dash thy foot against a stone. Or will he accuse the gospels of lying, and say, "Let Matthew and Luke see to it: I for my part approached God himself, I tempted the Almighty hand to hand: that was the reason for my approach, that was the reason for the temptation: otherwise, if it had been only God's son, perhaps I should not have demeaned myself  to tempt him"? Nay but he himself rather is a liar from, the beginning, and so is any man whom he has suborned with his own coin, like Praxeas. For this person was the first to import to Rome out of Asia this kind of wrong headedness-a man generally of restless character, and moreover puffed up with boasting of his confessorship on account of nothing more than a mere short discomfort of imprisonment: though even if he had given his body to be burned he would have profited nothing, since he had not the love of God whose spiritual gifts he also drove out by assault. For at that time the bishop of Rome was on the point of recognising the prophecies of Montanus and Prisca and Maximilla, and as a result of that recognition was offering peace to the churches of Asia and Phrygia; but this man, by false assertions concerning the prophets themselves and their churches, and by insistence on the decisions of the bishop's predecessors, forced him both to recall the letters of peace already issued and to desist from his project of receiving the spiritual gifts. Thus Praxeas at Rome managed two pieces of the devil's business: he drove out prophecy and introduced heresy: he put to flight the Paraclete and crucified the Father. Praxean tares were sown above the wheat and had germinated here also, while many were asleep in simplicity of doctrine. Thereafter they were brought to light, by whom God would, and seemed even to have been rooted up. In fact the teacher gave security for amendment by return to his former opinions, and his bond remains in the custody of the natural men, in whose presence the transaction was then carried out. After that, silence. I for my part was subsequently separated from the natural men by my acknowledgement and defence of the Paraclete. But those tares had at that time scattered their seed everywhere, and so for a time it lay hid, deceptively dissembling its life, and has now burst forth anew. But it shall also be plucked up anew, if the Lord will, in the time now at my disposal: if not, then in its due time all counterfeit grain will be gathered and,. along with other offences, be burned up in un- quenchable fire.

2. And so, after all this time, a Father who was born, a Father who suffered, God himself the Lord Almighty, is preached as Jesus Christ. We however as always, the more so now as better equipped through the Paraclete, that leader into all truth, believe (as these do) in one only God, yet subject to this dispensation (which is our word for "economy") that the one only God has also a Son, his Word who has proceeded from himself, by whom all things were made; and without whom nothing has been made : that this Son was sent by the Father into the virgin and was born of her both man and God, Son of man and Son of God, and was named Jesus Christ: that he suffered, died, and was buried, according to the scriptures, and, having been raised up by the Father and taken back into heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father and will come to judge the quick and the dead : and that thereafter he, according to his promise, sent from the Father the Holy Spirit the Paraclete, the sanctifier of the faith of those who believe in the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. That this Rule has come down from the beginning of the Gospel, even before all former heretics, not to speak of Praxeas of yesterday, will be proved as well by the comparative lateness of all heretics as by the very novelty of Praxeas of yesterday. So equally against all heretics let it from now on be taken as already proven that whatever is earliest is true and whatever is later is counterfeit. Still, saving that demurrer, yet everywhere, for the offensive and defensive equipment of certain persons, place must be granted also for further discussions, if for no other reason lest each several piece of wrong-headedness seem to be condemned not after examination but by previous judgement - and in particular this one which supposes itself to possess truth unadulterated while it thinks it impossible to believe in one God unless it says that both Father and Son and Holy Spirit are one and the same: as though the one God were not all these things in this way also, that they are all of the one, namely by unity of substance, while none the less is guarded the mystery of that economy which disposes the unity into trinity, setting forth Father and Son and Spirit as three, three however not in quality but in sequence, not in substance but in aspect, not in power but in its manifestation, yet of one substance and one quality and one power, seeing it is one God from whom those sequences and aspects and manifestations are reckoned out in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. How they admit of plurality without division the discussion will show as it proceeds.

3. For all the simple people, that I say not the thoughtless and ignorant (who are always the majority of the faithful), since the Rule of the Faith itself brings us over from the many gods of the world to the one only true God, not understanding that while they must believe in one only God yet they must believe in him along with his economy, shy at the economy. They claim that the plurality and ordinance of trinity is a division of unity - although a unity which derives from itself a trinity is not destroyed but administered by it. And so people put it about that by us two or even three gods are preached, while they, they claim, are worshippers of one God - as though unity irrationally summed up did not make heresy and trinity rationally counted out constitute truth. "We hold", they say, "to the monarchy": and even Latins so expressively frame the sound, and in so masterly a fashion, that you would think they understood monarchy as well as they pronounce it: but while Latins are intent to shout out " monarchy ", even Greeks refuse to understand the economy. But if I have gathered any small knowledge of both languages, I know that monarchy indicates neither more nor less than a single and sole empire, yet that monarchy because it belongs to one man does not for that reason make a standing rule that he whose it is may not have a son or must have made himself his own son or may not administer his monarchy by the agency of whom he will. Nay more, I say that no kingdom is in such a sense one man's own, in such a sense single, in such a sense a monarchy, as not to be administered also through those other closely related persons whom it has provided for itself as officers and if moreover he whose the monarchy is has a son, it is not ipso facto divided, does not cease to be a monarchy, if the son also is assumed as partner in it, but it continues to belong in first instance to him by whom it is passed on to the son: and so long as it is his, that continues to be a monarchy which is jointly held by two who are so closely united. Therefore if also the divine monarchy is administered by the agency of so many legions and hosts of angels (as it is written, Ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him and thousand thousands ministered unto him), yet has not therefore ceased to belong to one, so as to cease to be a monarchy because it has for its provincial governors so many thousand authorities, how should God be thought, in the Son and in the Holy Spirit occupying second and third place, while they are to such a degree conjoint of the Father's substance, to experience a division and a dispersion such as he does not experience in the plurality of all those angels, alien as they are from the Father's substance? Do you account provinces and family connexions and officials and the very forces and the whole trappings of empire to be the overthrow of it? You are wrong if you do. I prefer you to busy yourself about the meaning of a fact rather than the sound of a word. Overthrow of monarchy you should understand as taking place when there is superimposed another kingship of its own character and its own quality, and consequently hostile, when another god is introduced to oppose the Creator, as with Marcion, or many gods according to people like Valentinus and Prodicus : then is it for the overthrow of the monarchy when it is for the destruction of the Creator.

4. Yet how can I, who derive the Son from no alien source, but from the Father's substance, who say he does nothing without the Father's will and that he has received from the Father all authority - how can I in the matter of the faith be destroying that monarchy which I say has been delivered by the Father to the Son and is conserved in the Son? Let this be taken to apply also to the third sequence, for I reckon the Spirit from nowhere else than from the Father through the Son. Beware therefore lest you rather are destroying the monarchy, who are overthrowing that ordinance and dispensation of it which consists in as many names as God would. But to such a degree does it abide in its own quality, though a trinity be introduced, that it has even to be restored to the Father by the Son, inasmuch as the apostle writes concerning the last end, When he shall have delivered up the kingdom to the God and Father. For he must reign until God put all his enemies under his feet, evidently according to the psalm, Sit thou at my right hand until I make all thine enemies the footstool of thy feet. But when all things have been made subject to him, except him who hath subjected all things to him, then also he himself will be subjected to him who hash subjected all things to him, that God may be all things in all. We see then that the Son is not prejudicial to the monarchy, although today it is in the Son's hands, because it is both in its own quality in the Son's hands, and retaining its own quality will be restored to the Father by the Son. Thus no one will on this account destroy it by admitting a Son, when it is agreed both that it has been delivered to him by the Father and that sometime it is to be restored by him to the Father. By this one passage of the apostolic epistle we have already been able to show that Father and Son are two, besides by deduction from the names Father and Son, also from the fact that he who has delivered the kingdom and he to whom he has delivered it, as also he who has subjected it and he to whom he has subjected it, must of necessity be two.

5. But seeing they will have it that the two are one, so that the Father and the Son are to be considered identical, we must also examine the whole question concerning the Son, whether he is, and who he is, and in what manner he is, and thus the fact itself will establish its own legality by the advocacy of , the scriptures and the interpretations of them. Certain people affirm that in Hebrew Genesis begins, In the beginning God made for himself a son. Against the ratification of this I am persuaded by other arguments from God's ordinance in which he was before the foundation of the world until the generation of the Son. For before all things God was alone, himself his own world and location and everything - alone however because there was nothing external beside him. Yet not even then was he alone : for he had with him that Reason which he had in himself - his own, of course. For God is rational, and reason is primarily in him and thus from him are all things: and that Reason is his consciousness. This the Greeks call Logos, by which expression we also designate discourse: and consequently our people are already wont, through the artlessness of the translation, to say that Discourse was in the beginning with God, though it would be more appropriate to consider Reason of older standing, seeing that God is \[not\] discursive from the beginning but is rational even before the beginning, and because discourse itself, having its ground in reason, shows reason to be prior as being its substance. Yet even so it makes no difference. For although God had not yet uttered his Discourse, he always had it within himself along with and in his Reason, while he silently thought out and ordained with himself the things which he was shortly to say by the agency of Discourse: for while thinking out and ordaining them in company of his Reason, he converted into Discourse that Reason which he was discussing in discourse. And that you may understand this the more easily, observe first from yourself, as from the image and likeness of God, how you also have reason within yourself, who are a rational animal not only as having been made by a rational Creator but also as out of his substance having been made a living soul. See how, when you by reason argue silently with yourself, this same action takes place within you, while reason accompanied by discourse meets you at every movement of your thought, at every impression of your consciousness : your every thought is discourse, your every consciousness is reason: you must perforce speak it in your mind, and while you speak it you experience as a partner in conversation that discourse which has in it this very reason by which you speak when you think in company of that discourse in speaking by means of which you think. So in a sort of way you have in you as a second person discourse by means of which you speak by thinking and by means of which you think by speaking: discourse itself is another than your. How much more completely therefore does this action take place in God whose image and similitude you are authoritatively declared to be, that even while silent he has in himself reason, and in that reason discourse. So I have been able without rashness to conclude that even then, before the establishment of the universe, God was not alone, seeing he continually had in himself Reason, and in Reason Discourse, which he made another beside himself by activity within himself.

6. This function and this ordinance of the divine consciousness is in the scriptures also displayed under the name of Wisdom. For what is wiser than the Reason or Discourse of God? So listen also to Wisdom, established as a second person. First, The Lord created me as the beginning of his ways for his works' sake, before he made the earth, before the mountains were set in their places; yea, before all the hills he begat me - establishing and begetting, of course, in his own consciousness. Afterwards observe her, by the fact of being separate, standing by him: When he was preparing the heaven, she says, I was present with him, and as he made strong above the winds the clouds on high, and as he made safe the fountains of the earth\ which is under heaven, I was with him as a fellow-worker, I was she in whose presence he delighted; for daily did I delight in his person. For when first God's will was to produce in their own substances and species those things which in company of Wisdom and Reason and Discourse he had ordained within himself, he first brought forth Discourse, which had within it its own inseparable Reason and Wisdom, so that the universe of things might come into existence by the agency of none other than him by whose agency they had been thought out and ordained, yea even already made as far as concerns the consciousness of God: for this only they lacked, to be openly also recognised and apprehended in their own species and substances.

7. At that point therefore Discourse also itself receives its manifestation and equipment, namely sound and voice, when God says, Let there be light. This is the complete nativity of Discourse, when it comes forth from God: it was first established by him for thought under the name of Wisdom - The Lord established me as the beginning of his ways : then begotten for activity - When he prepared the heaven I was present with him : thereafter causing him to be his Father by proceeding from whom he became Son, the first-begotten as begotten before all things, the only- begotten as alone begotten out of God in a true sense from the womb of his heart, according as the Father himself testifies, My heart hath disgorged a good Discourse : and to him thenceforth us he rejoices in his person the Father himself rejoicing says, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, and, Before the daystar I begat thee. So also the Son in his own person, under the name of Wisdom, confesses the Father, The Lord established me as the beginning of his ways for his works' sake, yea before the hills he begat me. For if in this place it appears that Wisdom says she was established by the Lord for the sake of his works and ways, but elsewhere it is revealed that by Discourse were all things made and without him was not anything made, as also again By the Discourse of the Lord were the heavens confirmed, and all their host by his Spirit - that Spirit of course which was present in Discourse - it is clear that it is one and the same function, now under the name of Wisdom, now under the designation of Discourse, which received the beginning of ways for God's works' sake, which confirmed the heaven, by which all things were made and without which nothing was made. And enough of that, for evidently under the name of Wisdom and of Reason and of the whole divine mind and spirit we are to understand Discourse, who became Son of God when by proceeding from him he was begotten. " So", you say, "you postulate that Discourse is a sort of substance, consisting of spirit and wisdom and reason." Certainly. For you refuse to consider him substantive in objectivity, as being a substance which is himself, that thus he may be seen to be an object and a person, and so may be capable, inasmuch as he is another beside God, of causing there to be two, the Father and the Son, God and the Word : for what, you will say, is a word except voice and oral sound and (as the grammarians' tradition has it) smitten air intelligible in the hearing, for the rest an empty something, void and incorporal ? But I affirm that from God nothing void and empty can have come forth - for he is not void and empty from whom it has been brought forth: and that that cannot lack substance which has proceeded from so great a substance and is the maker of such great substances - for he himself is the maker of things which were made through him. How can he be nothing without whom no thing was made, so that one void should have wrought solid things, and one empty full things, and one incorporal corporal things? For although at times something can be made which is the opposite of that whereby it is made, yet by what is empty and void nothing can be made. Can you describe as an empty and void object that Word of God whom scripture calls the Son, who also is designated God - And the Word was with God and the Word was God? It is written, Thou shalt not take the name of God, for an empty thing. Certainly this is he who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. In what form of God? Evidently in some form, not in none: for who will deny that God is body, although God is a spirit ? . For spirit is body, of its own kind, in its own form. Moreover if those invisible things, whatever they are, have in God's presence both their own body and their own shape by which they are visible to God alone, how much more will that which has been sent forth from his substance not be devoid of substance. Whatever therefore the substance of the Word was, that I call a Person, and for it I claim the name of Son: and while I acknowledge him as Son I maintain he is another beside the Father.

8. If anyone thinks that hereby I introduce some "projection", that is, prolation of one thing from another, as Valentinus does who produces aeon from aeon one after another, in the first place I shall say to you, "The Truth does not abstain from using that word and the fact and the origin represented by it, on the ground that heresy uses it: nay rather, heresy has taken over from the Truth that which it might build up into its own lie". Was the Word of God brought forth, or not? Meet me on that ground. If he was brought forth, acknowledge "projection" as the Truth understands it, and let heresy beware what it has copied from the Truth. The question now before us is who uses, and in what sense he uses, any fact and the term that denotes it. Valentinus secludes and separates his "projections" from their originator, and places them so far from him that an aeon is ignorant of its father: at length it desires to know him and is unable, in fact it is almost consumed and dissolved into residuary substance. But with us the Son alone knows the Father, and himself has declared the bosom of the Father, and has both heard and seen all things in the Father's presence : and whatsoever things he has been commanded by the Father, those he also speaks : and has accomplished not his own will but the Father's, which he knew intimately, yea from the beginning. For who knows the things which be in God, except the Spirit who is in him? But the Word consists of spirit, and (so to speak) spirit is the body of the Word. Therefore the Word is always in the Father, as he says, I am in the Father : and always with God, as it is written, And the Word was with God: and never separate from the Father or other than the Father, because, I and the Father are one. This will be the Truth's "projection", the guardian of unity, that projections by which we say that the Son was brought forth from the Father, but not made separate. For God brought forth the Word, as also the Paraclete teaches, as a root brings forth the ground shoot, and a spring the river, and the sun its beam: for these manifestations also are "projections" of those substances from which they proceed. You need not hesitate to say that the shoot is son of the root and the river son of the spring and the beam son of the sun, for every source is a parent and everything that is brought forth from a source is its offspring - and especially the Word of God, who also in an exact sense has received the name of Son: yet the shoot is not shut off from the root nor the river from the spring nor the beam from the sun, any more than the Word is shut off from God. Therefore according to the precedent of these examples I profess that I say that God and his Word, the Father .and his Son, are two: for the root and the shoot are two things, but conjoined; and the spring and the river are two manifestations, but undivided; and the sun and its beam are two aspects, but they cohere. Everything that proceeds from something must of necessity be another beside that from which it proceeds, but it is not for that reason separated from its. But where there is a second one there are two, and where there is a third there are three. For the Spirit is third with God and his Son, as the fruit out of the shoot is third from the root, and the irrigation canal out of the river third from the spring, and the illumination point out of the beam third from the sun: yet in no respect is he alienated from that origin from which he derives his proper attributes. In this way the Trinity, proceeding by intermingled and connected degrees from the Father, in no respect challenges the monarchy, while it conserves the quality of the economy.

9. Remember at every point that I have professed this rule, by which I testify that Father and Son and Spirit are unseparated from one another, and in that case you will recognise what I say and in what sense I say it. For look now, I say that the Father is one, and the Son another, and the Spirit another (every unlearned or self-willed person takes this statement in bad part, as though it proclaimed diversity and because of diversity threatened a separation of Father and Son and Spirit: but I am bound to make it, so long as they maintain that Father and Son and Spirit are identical, favouring the monarchy at the expense of the economy), riot however that the Son is other than the Father by diversity, but by distribution, not by division but by distinction, because the Father is not identical with . the Son, they even being numerically one and another. For the Father is the whole substance, while the Son is an outflow and assignment of the whole, as he himself professes, Because my Father is greater than I: and by him, it is sung in the psalm, he has also been made less, a little on this side of the angels. So also the Father is other than the Son as being greater than the Son, as he who begets is other than he who is begotten, as he who sends is other than he who is sent, as he who makes is other than he through whom a thing is made. It suits my case also that when our Lord used this word regarding the person of the Paraclete, he signified not division but ordinance: for he says, I will pray the Father and he will send you another advocate, the Spirit of truth. Thus the calls the Paraclete other than himself, as we say the Son is other than the Father, so as to display the third sequence in the Paraclete as we the second in the Son, and so to preserve the economy. Is not the very fact that they are spoken of as Father and Son a statement that they are one thing beside another? Surely all facts will correspond with their designations, and diversity of designation can by no means be confused, since neither can  the diversity of the things of which they are the designations. " Is" is " is" , and " not" is "not": for what is more than this is on the side of evil.

10. Thus one "is" either father or son, and day is not identical with night, nor is the Father identical with the Son in the sense that both are one person and each is both terms of the relationship, as those very silly monarchians will have it. He himself, say they, made himself his own son. Nay, but father makes son, and son makes father, and those who become what they are by relationship with one another cannot by any means so become by relationship with themselves, as that a father should make himself his own son or a son cause himself to be his own father. The rules God has made, he himself observes. A father must have a son so as to be a father, and a son must have a father so as to be a son. For to have is one thing, to be is another: for example, to be a husband I must have a wife, I shall not be my own wife. So also, that I may be a father I have a son, I shall not be my own son: and that I may be a son I have a father, I shall not be my own father. For if I have those things that make me what I am I shall be what I am, a father if I have a son, a son if I have a father. Moreover, whatever of those I am, I have not that which I myself am, no father since I shall be the father, no son since I shall be the son. To what degree I must have one of these things so as to be the other, to that degree if I am both I cease to be the one because I have not the other. For if I am son who also am father, I already have no son but am myself son. But as not having a son because I am myself the son, how shall I be a father? For I must have a son so as to be a father, and consequently I am no son, because I have no father and father makes son. Equally, if I am father who also am son, already I have no father but am myself father. But as not having a father because I myself am the father, how shall I be a son? For I must have a father so as to be a son, and consequently I shall be no father, because I have no son and son makes father. This will be the sum of the devil's ability, to make the two mutually destructive, while by locking up both in one to please the monarchy he causes neither father nor son to be had, with the result that God is no father as not having a son, and the Sony is no son as equally having no father: for so long as he is the Father he will not be the Son. This is how these maintain the monarchy, who retain neither the Father nor the Son. "But", they says, "to God nothing is difficult." Who does not know it? and who is not aware that things impossible with the world are possible with God ? Also God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the things that are wise. We have read it all. "Consequently", they say, "it was not difficult for God to make himself both father and son, contrary to the law, traditional in human affairs: for it was not difficult for God, contrary to nature, to cause the barren woman to bear - or even the virgin." Certainly nothing is difficult for God: but if in our assumptions we so rashly make use of this judgement, we shall be able to invent any manner of thing concerning God, as that he has done it, on the ground that he was able to do it. But we must not, on the ground that he can do all things, for that reason believe that he has done even what he has not done, but must enquire whether he has done it. God could, if he had wished, have equipped men with wings for flying - a faculty he has also provided kites with: yet, because he could, he did not as a matter of course also do it. He could at once have blotted out of existence both Praxeas and all heretics alike: yet he has not, because he could, blotted them out. For there had to be kites, and heretics, and the Father had to be crucified. On this reckoning there will be something even difficult for God, that in fact which he has refrained from doing, not because he could not but because he would not. For God's power is his will, and his inability is his absence of will: and what his will was, that was in his power, and he has shown what it wash. Therefore, because if he wished he could have made himself his own son, and because if he could he did it, you will prove that he could have done it and wished to do it only when you have proved that he did do it.

11. But it will be your duty to prove it as openly from the scriptures as we prove that he made his own Word his Son. For if he calls him Son, while the Son will be no other than he who came forth from him, and the Word came forth from him, this Word will be the Son, not he from whom the Wordy came forth: for he did not himself come forth from himself. Further, you who identify Father and Son, cause the same one both to have brought forth from himself that which is God, and as such. to have come forth. If he could have done so, yet he did not do so. Or else display the proof which I demand, like mine, that is that the scriptures so represent the Son as identical with the Father as among us the Father and the Son are demonstrated in distinction: in distinction, I say, not in division. Just as I allege as spoken by God, My heart hath disgorged a good Word, against this do you object that God somewhere said, My heart hath disgorged myself as a good word, so that he himself may be both he who disgorged and what he disgorged, himself both he who brought forth and he who was brought forth, if he himself is Word and God. Look now, I allege that the Father said to the Son, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee : if you will have me believe that the Father himself is also the Son, show me that it is stated elsewhere in this form, The Lord said to himself, I am my son, today have I begotten myself: consequently also, Before the daystar have I begotten myself : and, I the Lord have established myself as the beginning of ways for my works' sake, yea before all the hills have I begotten myself : and any others there are in this fashion. Before whose disapproval was God, the Lord of the universe, afraid of so stating it, if so the fact was? Or was he afraid of not being believed if he plainly stated that he was both the Father and the Son? One thing however he was afraid of, to belie himself the author of truth, and to belie his own truth. And so, believing that God is true, I know that his statements are consonant with his ordinance, and his ordinance consonant with his statements. You however would make him a liar and a deceiver a disappointer of this faith of mine, if being himself his own son he assigned the role of son to another, since all the scriptures display both the demonstration and the distinctness of the Trinity: and from them is derived also our standing rule, that speaker and person spoken of and person spoken to cannot be regarded as one and the same, for as much as neither wilfulness nor deception befits God as that, being himself the one spoken to, he should prefer to speak to another and not to himself. Hear therefore also other words of the Father concerning the Son, spoken through Isaiah: Behold my son whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom I am well pleased; I will place my spirit upon him and he will announce judgement to the gentiles. Hear also what he says to him : It is a great thing for thee to be called my son for the establishment of the tribes of Jacob and the conversion of the dispersion of Israel; I have set thee for a light of the gentiles, that thou mayest be salvation unto the end of the earth. Hear next also the Son's words concerning the Father: The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, wherefore he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to men. Also in a psalm the speaks to the Father concerning the same Spirit: Forsake me not, until I announce thy arm to the whole generation to come. Also in another psalm: Lord, why are they increased that repress me ? Nay but almost all the psalms which sustain the role of Christ represent the Son as speaking to the Father, that is, Christ as speaking to God. Observe also the Spirit speaking in the third person concerning the Father and the Son: The Lord said unto my lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies the footstool of thy feet. Again, through Isaiah: Thus saith the Lord to my lord Christ. Also through the same prophet the Spirit speaks to the Father concerning the Son: Lord, who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? We have announced concerning him like a young boy, like a root in a thirsty land, and there was no beauty or glory of his. These are a few out of many: for we make no pretence of turning up the whole of the Scriptures, since even in one passage at a time we bring to witness their plenary majesty and authority, and thus have the advantage in argument in these discussions. So in these texts, few though they be, yet the distinctiveness of the Trinity is clearly expounded: for there is the Spirit himself who makes the statement, the Father to whom he makes it, and the Son of whom he makes it. So also the rest, which are statements made sometimes by the Father concerning the Son or to the Son, sometimes by the Son concerning the Father or to the Father, sometimes by the Spirit, establish each several Person as being himself and none other.

12. If you are still offended by the plurality of the Trinity, on the ground that it is not combined in simple unity, I ask you how it, is that one only single person speaks in the plural, Let us make man after our image and likeness, when he ought to have said, Let me make man after my image and likeness, as being one only single person. Also in what follows, Behold, Adam is become as one of us, he is deceptive or joking in speaking in the plural while being one and alone and singular. Or was he speaking to the angels, as the Jews explain it, because they, like you, do not recognise the Son? Or, because he was himself father-son-spirit, did he for that reason make himself plural and speak to himself in the plural? Nay rather, because there already was attached to him the Son, a second Person, his Word, and a third Person, the Spirit in the Word, for that reason he spoke in the plural, Let us make, and Our, and Of us. For in whose company was he making man, and like whom was he making him? He was speaking with the Son who was to assume manhood, and the Spirit who was to sanctify man, as with ministers and mediators in consequence of the unity of the Trinity. Then again the scripture that follows distinguishes between the Persons: And God made man, in the image of God made he him. Why not "his own image", if the maker was one, and there was none in whose image he was making him? But there was one in whose image he was making him, the Son's in fact, who because he was to be the surer and truer man caused that man to be called his image who at that time had to be formed of clay, as the image and similitude of the true. But also in the preceding works of the world, how is it written ? At first, while the Son is not yet on the scene, And God said, Let there be light, and it was made. The Word himself is in first instance the true light that lighteneth the man that cometh into this world and through him also the mundane light comes to bed. But from then on in the Word, that is, with Christ as assistant and minister, God wished things to be made, and God made them: And God said, Let a firmament be made, and God made a firma- ment : And God said, Let lights be made, and God made the greater and the lesser light. So also the rest of things the very same one made as made the earlier, that is, the Word of God by whom all things were made and without whom nothing was made. And if he himself is God, as John says - the Word was God - you have two, one commanding a thing to be made, another making it. But how you must understand "another" I have already professed, in the sense of person, not of substance, for distinctiveness, not for division. Yet although I always maintain one substance in three who cohere, I must still, as a necessary consequence of the meaning of the passage, say that he who commands is other than he who makes. For he would not be commanding if he himself were making while commanding things to be made. Yet he did command them to be made by him, since he would not have commanded himself if he had been one alone: or he would have made them without command, for he would not have waited to command himself.

13. "Consequently", you say, "if God spake and God made, if one God spake and another made, two gods are preached." If you are so stubborn, keep on thinking so for a time. And, to give you more cause to think it, hear how also in a psalm two are called gods: Thy throne, O God, is for ever, a sceptre of direction is the sceptre of thy kingdom ; thou hast loved righteousness and hatest iniquity, wherefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee. If he is speaking to God, and to God anointed by God, here also he affirms that two are gods. Concerning this also Isaiah speaks, regarding the person of Christ, And the Sabaans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee and shall follow after thee with their hands in chains and shall worship thee because God is in thee; for thou art our God and we knew it not, O God of Israel. For here also, by saying God is in thee, and Thou O God, he sets forth two, him who was in Christ, and Christ himself. It is of more moment that in the Gospel you will find the same number: In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God : there is one who "was", and another "within whom" he was. Also I read the name Lord applied to two: The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand. And Isaiah says this: Lord, who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? For he would have said "thy arm", not "arm of the Lord", unless he had wished us to understand Lord the Father and Lord the Son. Also Genesis, of still older date: And the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire out of heaven from the Lord. Either deny that these things are written, or who are you that you should think they must not be accepted as they are written, especially those which have their meaning not in allegories and parables but in clearly defined and simple statements? But if you are of those who on one occasion did not tolerate our Lord when he showed himself to be the Son of God, for fear of having to believe that he is the Lord, recollect, along with them that it is written, I said, Ye are gods and sons of the Most High ; and, God standeth in the congregation of the gods : so that, if scripture has not been afraid to pronounce to be gods those men who by faith have been made sons of God, you may know that much more has it by right applied the name of God and Lord to the true and only Son of God. "Therefore", you say, "I will challenge you, today also by the authority of those scriptures consistently to preach two gods and two lords." God forbid. For we, who by the grace of God examine both the occasions and the intentions of the scriptures, especially as being disciples not of men but of the Paraclete, do indeed specify two, the Father and the Son, and even three with the Holy Spirit, according to that calculation of the economy which makes plurality, lest, as your selfwill imports, the Father himself be believed to have been born and to have died - which is not lawful to be believed, seeing it has not been so delivered. Yet "two gods" or " two lords" we never let issue from our mouth: not but that both the Father is God and the Son is God and the Holy Spirit is God, and each several one of them is God; but that of old time two were preached as Gods and two as Lords, so that when Christ came he should both be recognised as God and have the name of Lord, because he is the son of him who is God and Lord. For if there were found in the scriptures one Person both of God and of the Lord, rightly would Christ not have been admitted to the name of God and Lord (because none other besides one God and one Lord was preached), and it would have come about that the Father himself would have seemed to have come down from heaven (because we were reading of one God and one Lord), and darkness would have fallen upon his whole economy which was designed and administered for material of faith. But when Christ came and was known by us as being he who of old time had caused plurality by being made a second beside the Father, and a third along with the Spirit, and now that through him the Father was more fully made manifest, the name of God and of Lord was reduced again to union: with the result that, since the gentiles were passing over from a multitude of idols to the one only God, a difference was established between worshippers of one divinity and worshippers of many. For it was necessary also that Christians should shine in the world as sons of light, while worshipping and calling upon the name of the light of the world, one God as also one Lord. Otherwise, if as a result of the private knowledge by which we know that the name of God and of Lord is applicable to both Father and Son and Spirit, we had been calling upon the name of gods and lords, we should have put out our candle by being also less bold in face of martyrdom; for at every turn - opportunity would lie open for us to escape by immediately swearing by gods and lords, as do certain heretics whose gods are more than one. Consequently I shall in no case say either "gods" or "lords", but shall follow the apostle, with the result that if the Father and the Son are to be mentioned together, I call the Father "God" and name Jesus Christ " the Lord ". But Christ by himself I shall be able to call God, as does the same apostle when he says, Of whom is Christ, who is God over all, blessed for evermore. For also the sun's beam, when by itself, I shall call "the sun": but when naming the sun, whose the beam is, I shall not immediately call the beam "the sun". For though I make two suns, yet the sun and its beam I shall count as two objects, and two manifestations of one undivided substance, in the same sense as I count God and his Word, the Father and the Son.

14. Once more, we have the support, in our vindication of the duality of the Father and the Son, of that rule which has defined God as invisible. For when Moses in Egypt had expressed a desire for the sight of God, saying, If therefore I have found grace in thy sight shew thyself to me that I may knowledgeably see thee, God said, Thou canst not see my face, for a man will not see my . face and live - that is, he who, sees it will die. For we find that God was seen, even by many, yet that none of those who had seen him died-that God was seen, of course, according to men's capacity, not according to the fulness of his divinity. For patriarchs are related to have seen God, as Abraham and Jacob, and prophets, as Isaiah, as Ezekiel, yet they did not die. Therefore they either ought to have died, if they had seen him - for no man will see God and live: or, if they saw God and did not die, the scripture says falsely that God said, If a man sees my face he shall not live : or else the scripture speaks falsely when it alleges that God was seen. So then it will be another who was seen, for it is impossible for the same one who was seen, to be characterised as invisible: and it will follow that we must understand the Father as invisible because of the fulness of his majesty, but must acknow- ledge the Son as visible because of the enumeration of his deriva- tion, just as we may not look upon the sun in respect of the total of its substance which is in the sky, though we can with our eyes bear its beam because of the moderation of the assignment which from thence reaches out to the earth. Here one of our adversaries will wish to contend that the Son also is invisible as Word and as Spirit, and, maintaining that the Father and the Son are in like case, to affirm rather that Father and Son are one and the same. But we have deposed that the scripture, by its distinguishing of visible and invisible, advocates a difference. For they also add this to their quibbling, that if on that occasion it was the Son speaking toMoses he pronounced his own face visible to no man, because of course he was the invisible Father himself under the name of Son. And consequently they wish the visible one and the invisible one to be taken as identical, in the same way as  they wish Father and Son to be taken as identical, because also a little earlier, before he refused Moses  the sight of his face, it is written that the Lord spake to Moses face to face as a man speaks to his friend, and furthermore that Jacob says, I have seen the Lord face to face : consequently the same one is visible and invisible: and because the same one has both attributes, therefore also the invisible Father is himself visible, as being also Son. As though the explanation of the scripture which we offer did not, leaving the Father out of question, befit the Son in his own visibility. For we say that the Son also on his own account is, as Word and Spirit, invisible even now by the quality of his substance; but that he was visible before the incarnation in the manner in which he says to Aaron and Miriam, Although there be a prophet among you, I shall become known to him in a vision and shall speak to him in a dream; not as with my servant Moses shall I speak to him mouth to mouth in manifestation - that is, in truth - and not in an enigma - that is, not in imagination: as also says the apostle, Now we see as in a mirror in an enigma, but then face to face. Therefore since for Moses he reserves for the future the sight of himself and conversation with himself face to face (for this was fulfilled afterwards when he withdrew into a mountain, as we read in the Gospel that Moses was seen talking with him), it is clear that always aforetime God - that is, the Son of God - was seen in a mirror and an enigma and a vision and a dream, both by prophets and patriarchs and Moses himself till that time: and if perchance the Lord did speak in visual presence, yet a man would not see his face as he really is, but only perchance in a mirror and in an enigma. Lastly, if the Lord spoke to Moses in such sort that Moses knew his face from near to, why does he immediately at the same moment ask to see his face, which if he had seen he would not ask to see? Equally, why does the Lord deny that his face can be seen, though he had let him see it, if indeed he had let him see it? Or what face of God is that, the sight of which is refused? If there was a face which was seen - I have seen, says Jacob, God face to face and my life is preserved \- there must be another face which slays if it is seen. Or is it that the Son indeed was seen - albeit in face, yet even this in a vision and a dream and a mirror and an enigma, because Word and Spirit cannot be seen except in imaginary aspect - yet by his face he means the invisible Father? For who is the Father? Shall he be the Son's face, on account of the authority which he obtains as, begotten of the Father? For is it not of some greater personage that it befits one to say, " That man is my face", or " He gives me face" ? The Father, he says, is greater than I : therefore the Father will be the Son's face. For also what says the scripture? The spirit of his countenance, Christ the Lord. Therefore if Christ is the spirit of the Father's countenance, rightly has the Spirit pronounced him whose the countenance is, namely his Father, to be his face - evidently because of their unity. Can you be surprised if the Father can be understood to be the Son's face, when he is his head? For the head of Christ is God.

15 . If I do not clear this point by enquiries made of the old scriptures, I shall take from the New Testament confirmation of our interpretation, lest whatever I account to the Son you immediately claim for the Father. For both in the gospels and in the apostles I discover God visible and invisible, with an evident personal distinction betwen these two qualities. John as it were cries out, No man hath seen God at any time - clearly not in the past, for he has precluded question of time by saying that God was never seen. The apostle also confirms this, speaking of God whom no man hath seen, nor can he be seen - obviously because he who sees him will die. Those very same apostles testify both that they have seen Christ and that they have handled him. Consequently if Christ is himself both Father and Son, how is he both seen and unseen? So as to confer upon one Person this diversity of "seen" and "unseen", our adversary will argue that both are rightly spoken, since he wash visible in the incarnation but invisible before the incarnation; and that consequently the Father, invisible before the incarnation, is the same Person as the Son, visible in the incarnation. And yet, if the same Person was invisible before the incarnation, how is it he is found to have been seen also aforetime before the incarnation? Equally, if the same Person is visible after the incarnation, how is he even now pronounced invisible by the apostles, unless there is one whom, aforetime seen in an enigma, the incarnation his made more fully visible - the Word in fact, who also was made flesh - and another whom no one hath ever seen - the Father in fact, whose the Word is? Once for all let us examine who it was the apostles saw. That which we have seen, says John, which we have heard, have seen with our eyes, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life. For the Word of life was made flesh, and was heard and seen and handled because he was flesh, the same who before the incarnation as Word only was in the beginning in the presence of God the Father, not the Father in the presence of himself. For although the Word was God, yet he was God in the presence of God, because he was God from God, because he was along with the Father, in the Father's presence. And we beheld his glory, the glory\ as of the only-begotten of the Father - evidently of course the glory of the visible Son, glorified by the invisible Father. And consequently, because he had said that the Word of God was God, so as not to assist our adversaries' assumption as that he had seen the Father himself, but so as to distinguish between the invisible Father and the visible Son, he adds of superfluity, No one hath seen God at any time. Which God? The Word? Nay but, it was said before, We have seen and heard and handled, of the Word of life. But which God? Evidently the Father, in whose presence the Word, the only-begotten Son, who himself hath declared the bosom of the Father, was God. He himself was both heard and seen, and lest he should be taken for a phantom was even handled. Him also Paul had sight of, yet he saw not the Father. Have I not, he says, seen Jesus ? But he also has applied to Christ the name of God: Whose are the fathers, and out of whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is God over all, blessed for ever . He also presents as visible the Son of God, that is, the Word of God, because he who was made flesh is called Christ. But of the Father he says to Timothy, Whom no man hath seen nor can see 8 : and he piles it up even more, Who alone hath immortality and dwelleth in light unapproachable : and of him he had previously said, To the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the only God, so that to the Son we might ourselves also ascribe the contrary, mortality and approachability. Him also he testifies to have died according to the scriptures, and to have been seen of himself last of all - evidently by means of approachable light: though even that he did not. experience without danger to his sight, as neither did Peter and John and James without danger to their reason and without astonishment, and if they had seen, not the glory of the Son who was to suffer, but the Father, I think they would have died on the spot: for no one will see God and live. As this is so, our case stands, that from the beginning he always was seen who was seen at the end, and that he was notseen at the end who from the beginning had not been seen, and that thus there are two, one seen and one unseen. Therefore it was the Son always who was seen and the Son always who conversed and the Son always who wrought, by the authority and will of the Father; because The Son can do nothing of himself, unless he have seen the Father doing it \-doing it, of course, in his consciousness. For the Father acts by consciousness, whereas the Son sees and accomplishes that which is in the Father's con- sciousness. Thus all things were made by the Son, and without him nothing was made.

16. And think not that solely the works of the world were made by the Son,, but those also which from then on were per- formed by God. For the Father, who loveth the Son and hath delivered all things into his bosom, right from the beginning loves him, and from the beginning has delivered them. Ever since from the beginning the Word was with God and the Word was God, and to him was given by the Father all power in heaven and in earth, The Father judgeth no man, but hath delivered all judgement to the Son, yes, from the beginning: for when he says "all power" and "all judgement", and that all things were made by him, and that all things are delivered into his hand, he allows no exception of time, for they will not be "all" unless they have been of all time. And so it is the Son who from the beginning has judged, smashing down the tower of pride and confounding the tongues, punishing the whole world by the violence of the waters, raining down upon Sodom and Gomorrah fire and brimstone - the Lord raining it down from the Lord. For he it always was who came down to converse with men, from Adam even to the patriarchs and prophets, always from the beginning preparing beforehand in dream and in a mirror and in an enigma that course which he was going to follow out to the end. Thus he was always also learning how as God to company with men, being none other than the Word who was to be flesh. But he was learn- ing with the purpose of laying. a foundation of faith for us, that we might the more easily believe that the Son of God has come down into the world, if we knew that something of the sort had previously been done. For, as things were written, so also they were done, for our sake upon whom the ends of the world are come. Thus also he already at that time knew human affections, as he was going to take upon himself also man's substances, flesh and soul, asking Adam a question as though he did not know - Adam, where art thou ? - repenting that he had made man, as though he had no foreknowledge; tempting Abraham, as though ignorant what is in a man ; angry, and reconciled with the same persons ; and all those things which heretics, for the destruction of the Creator, seize upon as unworthy of God, ignorant that these things befitted the Son, who was also going to undergo human passions, both thirst and hunger and tears and nativity itself and death itself, for this purpose made by the Father a little lower than the angels. But the heretics indeed will refuse to count proper even for the Son things with which you becloud the Father himself, as though he had himself made himself lower for our sakes, though the scripture says that one was made lower by another, not himself by himself. Moreover it is one who was crowned with glory and honour, and it is another who crowned him, evidently the Father crowning the Son. Besides, how can it be that God Almighty, that invisible one whom none of men hath seen nor can see, he who dwelleth in light unapproachable, he who dwelleth not in things made with hands, before whose aspect the earth trembleth, and the mountains melt as wax, who graspeth the whole world in his hand like a nest, whose throne is the heaven and the earth his footstool, in whom is all space but he not in space, who is the boundary line of the universe, he the Most High, should have walked in paradise in the evening looking for Adam, should have shut up the ark after Noah had gone in, should have rested under an oak with Abraham, should have called to Moses from the burning bush, and should have appeared with three others in the Babylonian king's furnace - although it says he was a son of man? Certainly these things ought not to have been believed of the Son of God unless they had been written, and perhaps not to have been believed of the Father though they had been written: yet these people bring him down into Mary's womb, and set him at Pilate's judgement seat, and shut him up in Joseph's sepulchre. Hence therefore it is evident that they are astray. For not knowing that from the beginning the whole course of the divine ordinance has come down through the Son, they believe that the Father himself both was seen and conversed and wrought, and suffered thirst and hunger, in spite of the prophet who says The eternal God shall never thirst nor hunger at all - and how much more shall he neither die nor be buried-and that thus the one God, that is, the Father, has always done those things which in fact have been performed by the agency of the Son.

17. They have found it easier to think that the Father has acted in the Son's name than the Son in the Father's though the Lord himself says, I am come in my Father's name : and again, to the Father himself he says, I have manifested thy name to men : and the scripture also agrees, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord - evidently the Son in the name of the Father. And the Father's name is God Almighty, the Most High, the Lord of hosts, the King of Israel, I am. In as much as the scriptures so teach, we say that these also have applied to the Son, and that in these the Son came, and in these always acted, and thus in himself manifested them to men. All things that the Father hath, he says, are mine : and why not also the names? When therefore you read of God Almighty, and the Most High, and the God of hosts, and the King of Israel, and I am, beware lest by these the Son also is shown to be of his own right God Almighty as, being the Word of God Almighty and as having received power over all ; and the Most High as having been by the right hand of God exalted, as Peter preached in the Acts; and the Lord of Hosts because all things are subjected to him by the Father ; and the King of Israel because to him especially , has fallen the lot of that nation ; and also "I am" because there are many that are called sons and art not. But if they will have it that Christ's name also is the Father's, they will hear my answer in its proper place. Meantime let this be my ready response against that which they allege from the Revelation of John, I am the Lord, who is and who was and is to come, the Almighty, and wherever else they think the designation "Almighty" not appropriate to the Son: as if he who is to come were not the Almighty, when the Son of the Almighty is no less almighty than the Son of God is God.

18. But they are thrust out of the way of easily seeing in the Son this partnership in the Father's names by those occasions when the scripture has stated that God is one alone-as though the same scripture had not set before us two Gods and Lords, as we have already shown. Therefore, say they, because we find two as well as one, consequently both are one Person, and the same one is both Son and Father. Surely the scripture is not in such jeopardy that you have to come to its rescue by your quibbling to prevent it from appearing to be contrary to itself: it is correct both when it states that God is one only and when it reveals Father and Son as two, and it needs no help but its own. It is agreed that by it the name of the Son is mentioned: for without prejudice to the Son it can be right in having defined as one only, God whose son the Son is. For he who has a son does not cease to be one only, on his own account of course as often as he is named without his son: and he is named without his son when he is primarily defined as the first person who must needs be premised before the name of the son, because the father is first, recognised, end after the father the son is named. Therefore there is one God, the Father, and besides him there is no other, and he himself who introduces this statement is denying, not the Son, but another god: whereas the Son is not another god than the Father. Finally, look at the contexts -of statements like this, and you will find that their pronouncement has an eye to makers and worshippers of idols, so that a multitude of false gods may be ejected by the unity of the divine, the one Gods, who yet has a Son who, precisely because he is indivisible and inseparable from the Father, must be accounted as in the Father even when his name is not mentioned. And moreover, if he had mentioned him he would have made him separate - if he had spoken in this manner, Beside me there is none other except my Son: for he would have made the Son another god by excepting him from those others who are no gods. Imagine the sun saying, I am the sun and beside me there is none other except my beam would you not have remarked adversely upon his futility, as though the beam were not accounted in the sun? And so the statement that besides himself there is no other god is made on account of the idolatry both of the gentiles and of Israel: also on account of the heretics, who manufacture idols with words as the gentiles do with their hands - that is, another God and another Christ. Therefore even when pronouncing himself one the Father was serving the Son's interest, lest Christ should be believed to have come from any other God than him who had already said, I am God, and other beside me there is not, God who reveals himself as one only, yet one only with the Son, with whom also he alone has spread out the heaven.

19. Yes, and also this saying of his they will seize upon for a proof of his singularity. I alone, he says, have spread out the heaven - alone in respect of the other powers, erecting a barrier against the guesses of the heretics, who will have it that the world was built by angels and hostile powers, heretics who make the creator himself either an angel or one suborned for other external acts, like the making of the world, and ignorant at that. Or if in their sense he alone spread out the heaven, why do these present heretics perversely assume the exclusion of that singular Wisdom who says, When he prepared the heaven I was present with him? And if one has said, Who hath known the mind of the Lord and who hath been his counsellor?, evidently he means "besides Wisdom who was present with him". In him, however, and with him she fashioned all things, seeing he was not ignorant what he was doing. But "besides Wisdom" means "besides the Son ", who is Christ the Wisdom and the Power of God, as the apostle says, he who alone knoweth the mind of the Father: for who knoweth the things which be in God; except the Spirit which is in him ? - not which is outside him. There was then one who made God not alone, except as alone in respect of other gods. But also let the Gospel be refused a hearing because it says that all things were made by God through the Word, and that without him was nothing made. For, if I mistake not, it is also elsewhere written, By his Word were the heavens established, and all their powers by his Spirit. But the Word also, the Power and the Wisdom, will himself be the Son of God. Thus if all things are by the Son, when he spreads out the heaven also by the Son he is not alone in spreading it out, except on that reckoning that he is alone in respect of the other gods. And consequently he immediately speaks concerning the Son: Who else hath cast down the tokens of the ventriloquists, and divinations away from the heart, turning the wise backward and making their counsel foolish, establishing the words of his Son? - by saying, of course, This is my beloved Son, hear him. By thus subjoining the Son, he himself is the interpreter of how he alone has spread out the heaven, that is, alone with his Son, even as he is one thing with his Son. And further, it will be the Son's voice which says I alone have spread out the heaven, because by the Word were the heavens established:, because with the assistance of Wisdom in the Word the heaven was prepared, and because all things were made by the Word, it is feasible for the Son also alone to have spread out the heaven, because he alone ministered to the Father's operation. He also it will be who says, I am the first, and unto things that are to come after, I am he. Evidently the Word is the first thing of all: In the beginning was the Word, and in that beginning he was brought forth by the Father: whereas the Father, having no beginning, as having been brought forth by none, as being unborn, cannot be regarded as first: he who was always alone could have no numerical order. Therefore if their reason for thinking they must believe the identity of the Father and the Son has been. that they may prove their case for the unity of God, the unity is safe of him who, being one, has also a Son himself also no less than the Father included in the same scriptures. If they are, unwilling for the Son to be accounted a second beside the Father, lest the second give rise to the expression "two gods", we have shown that even two Gods are referred to in scripture, and two Lords: and yet, that they be not offended at that, we are rendering an account how the expressions "two gods" or "two lords" are not used, but how the Father and the Son are two, and this not as a result of separation of substance, but as a result of ordinance, while we declare the Son indivisible and inseparable from the Father, another not in quality but in sequence, who, although he is called God when he is named by himself, yet does not for that reason make a duality of gods, but one God, by this very fact that he has to be called God as a result of his unity with the Father.

20. But for the further rebutment of their quibblings we must pay attention to whatever they will glean from the new scriptures to support their opinion, while they refuse to look at the other places which themselves also observe the rule, and that while safeguarding the divine unity and the impressiveness of the monarchy. For as in the old scriptures they retain nothing else but, I am God and other beside me there is not, so in the Gospel they uphold the Lord's answer to Philip, I and the Father are one, and, He that hath seen me hath also seen the Father, and, I am in the Father and the Father in me. To these three citations they wish the whole appurtenance of both testaments to yield, though the smaller number ought to be understood in accordance with the greater. But this is the characteristic of all heretics. For because there are a few instances which can be found among the undergrowth, they maintain the cause of these) few against the many and become advocates of the later against the earlier. But the rule determined for every subject in earlier instances ever since the beginning, makes a precedent for the later also-and the same in the case of the fewer.

21. See therefore how many instances set the precedent for you even in the Gospel, before Philip's consultation and before all your quibbling. And to begin with, the very preface of John the Evangelist shows what he who had to be made flesh had aforetime been: In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God; the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made through him, and without him was nothing made. For if this may not otherwise be received than as it is written, undoubtedly one is revealed who was from the beginning, and another with whom he was. the reveals one the Word of God, and God another-though the Word also is God, but as God's Son, not as the Father: one through whom are all things, another by whom are all things. But what we mean by "another" we have already often explained. When we say " another" we necessarily mean "not the same" : "not the same" however not as separated, another by ordinance, not by division. He therefore it was who was made flesh, not he whose Word he was. His was the glory seen, as of the only one of the Father, not as of the Father. He, the only one, has revealed the bosom of the Father, not the Father his own bosom: for there comes first, No one hath seen God at any time. Therefore even if he is pointed out by John as the Lamb of God he is not pointed out as he whose beloved he is. Certainly he is always God's Son, not he whose Son he is. Nathanael immediately perceived this of him, as also did Peter elsewhere: Thou art the Son of God. And that this they rightly perceived he himself confirms, replying to Nathanael, Because I said I saw thee under the fig tree, therefore thou believest ; and affirming the blessedness of Peter, to whom not flesh or blood had revealed what he had perceived, the Father as well as the Son, but the Father who is in heaven. And by this saying he determined the distinction of both Persons, the Son on earth whom Peter had recognised as God's Son, and the Father in heaven who had revealed to Peter what Peter had recognised, that Christ is God's Son. When he has entered into the Temple he calls it his Father's house, as a son would. When he speaks to Nicodemus he says, God so loved the world that he gave his only Son that every one who believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting life : and again, For God sent not his Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world may be saved through him; he that believeth in him is not judged; he that believeth not in him is, judged already; because he hath not believed in the name of the only Son of God. When John moreover was being asked what he thought of Jesus when he was baptizing, he said, The Father hath loved the Son and hath delivered all things into his hand; he that believeth in the Son hath eternal life; he that believeth not in the ,Son of God shall not see God, but the wrath of God shall abide upon him. Whom moreover did he reveal to the Samaritan woman ? If it was the Messiah who is called Christ, evidently he showed himself to be the Son, not the Father, for elsewhere also Christ is called the Son of God, not the Father. Thereafter to the disciples he says, Mine it is to do the will of him that sent me, that I may accomplish his work. And to the Jews concerning the healing of the paralytic he says, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work : "my father and I " is what a son says. At length for this cause the Jews the more sought to kill him, not only because he relaxed the sabbath, but because he called God his Father, making himself equal with God. Then therefore he said to them, The Son can do nothing of himself, except he see the Father doing it; for the things which he doeth, the same also the Son doeth; for the Father loveth the Son and hath shewn him all things which he hath done, and greater works than these shall he shew him, that ye may marvel; for as the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, so also the Son quickeneth whom he will. For neither doth the Father judge, but hath given all judgement to the Son, that all may honour the Son as they honour the Father; he that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father who sent him. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he who heareth my words and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life, and shall not come into judgement but hath passed from death into life. Verily I say unto you, that the hour will come in which the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and when they have heard shall live; for as the Father hath eternal life in himself so also hath he given to the Son to have eternal life in himself, and hath given him to do judgement with authority, because he is the Son of Man - through the flesh of course, as he is also Son of God through God's Spirit. Again he adds, But I have a greater witness than John's; for the works which the Father hath given me to accomplish, themselves bear witness concerning me that the Father hath sent me; and the Father who hath sent me, himself hath borne witness concerning me. But when he adds, Ye have neither heard his voice at any time nor seen his form, he confirms our position that aforetime it was not the Father but the Son who was seen and heard. At length he says, I am come in my Father's name and ye have not received me - consequently the Son always was in the name of God and King and Lord Almighty and Most High. To those moreover who asked him what they must do he replied, To believe in him whom God hath sent. He affirms also that he is the bread which the Father was providing from heaven: consequently that everything which the Father gave him was coming to him, and that he would not cast it out, because he had come down from heaven not to do his own will but the Father's; and that the Father's will was that he who hath seen the Son and believeth in him may obtain life and resurrection: further, that no one can come to him except him whom the Father draweth, and that everyone who had heard and had learned from the Father was coming to him : adding at this point also, Not that anyone hath seen the Father, that he might show that he was the Father's Word by whom men become taught. But when many go away from him, and he gives his disciples the chance of going away if they wish, what did Simon Peter answer? Whither go we? Thou hast the words of life, and we believe that thou art Christ. Does he meant that he is the Father, or the Father's Christ?

22. But whose doctrine does he say it was at which they marvelled? His own, or the Father's? Likewise when they were in doubt among themselves whether he were not the Christ - evidently not the Father but the Son - he says, Ye both know me and ye know whence I am, and I am not come of myself, but he is true that hath sent me, whom ye know not: I know him because I am with him. He says not, Because I am he, or, I have sent myself, but, He hath sent me. Also when the Pharisees had sent to attack him, he said, Yet a little time I am with you, and I go to him that sent me. But when he says he is not alone - But I, he says, and the Father that sent me \- does he not point to two, as much two as inseparable? Yea, this was the whole of his teaching, that there are two, inseparable: since also while citing the law which confirms the witness of two men, he adds, I bear witness concerning myself, and the Father who sent me beareth witness concerning me. But if there had been but one Person, the same one being both Son and Father, he would not have made use of the advocacy of the law which demands belief in the witness not of one but of two. Also when asked where was the Father, when he replied that neither he nor the Father was known to them, he spoke of two unknown, though if they had known him they would have known the Father: not indeed as though he were himself Father and Son, but because through their indivisibility the one can neither be known nor unknown without the other. He that sent me, he says, is true, and the things which I have heard from him, those also I speak unto the world : and the scripture in a digression explains that they knew not that he had spoken to them of the Father ; though of course they ought to have known that the Father's words are in the Son, by reading in Jeremiah, And the Lord said to me, Behold I have put my words in thy mouth ; and in Isaiah, The Lord giveth me the tongue of discipline to know when it is right to speak a word ; as he himself again says, Then shall ye know that I am he, and that of myself I speak nothing, but as he hath taught me so also I speak, because also he is with me that hath sent me. So much concerning the witness of two who are indivisible. Also in the dispute with the Jews, when chiding them because they wished to kill him, he says, I speak those things which I have seen with my Father, and ye do that which ye have seen with your father; and now ye wish to kill me, a man who hath spoken to you the truth which he hath heard from God : and, If God were your father ye would have loved me, for I came forth and am come from God (howbeit they are not separated, though he said he was come forth, as some seize upon the chance which this saying gives them: for he came forth from the Father like the beam from the sun, like the stream from the spring, like the groundshoot from the seed): and, I have not a devil, but I honour my Father : and, If I glorify myself my glory is nothing; there is one that glorifieth me, the Father, who ye say is your God and ye do not know him; but I know him, and if I shall say, 1 know him not, I shall be a liar like unto you; but I know him and I keep his word. But when he adds, Abraham saw my day and rejoiced, he surely shows that aforetime the Son was seen by Abraham, not the Father. Again, regarding that blind man he says he must do the Father's works: and after the restoration of his eyes he says to him, Dost thou believe in the Son of God ? And when he asked who was he and he pointed out himself, he evidently pointed out the Son, who he had told him must be believed in. Thereafter he claims that he is known by the Father and the Father by him, and that he is loved by the Father because he lays down his life, because he had received this commandment from the Father. And when asked by the Jews whether he were himself the Christ (evidently  the Christ of God, for even to the present day the Jews are hoping for the Christ of God, not the Father himself, for it is nowhere written that Christ the Father will come), he says, I speak to you and ye believe not; the works which I do in the Father's name themselves bear witness concerning me. What witness? That he of course was he concerning whom they were asking, that is, the Christ of God. And concerning his sheep, that no one would snatch them from his hand, he says, For what the Father hath given me is greater than they all; and, I and the Father are one. Here then they wish to make a stand, these fools, yea blind, who see not, first, that "I and the Father" is an indication of two; secondly, at the end of the sentence, that "are" is not from the person of one, because it is, spoken in the plural; and then, that he says "are one thing", not "are one person ". For if he had said "are one person " he would have been able to assist their case: for "one person" is apparently an indication of the singular number. Yet when he says that two, of the masculine gender, are one thing, in the neuter-which is not concerned with singularity but with unity, with similitude, with conjunction, with the love of the Father who loveth the Son, and with the obedience of the Son who obeys the Father's will-when he says, One thing are I and the Father, he shows that those whom he equates and conjoins are two. Consequently he adds that he has shown them also many works from the Father, none of which deserved stoning. And so that they should not think they ought to stone him on the ground that he had wished himself to be taken for God himself, that is, tie Father, because he had said I and the Father are one, by way of showing that he is God, the Son of God, not by way of showing that he is God himself, he says, If it is written in the law, I said, Ye are gods, and the scripture cannot be relaxed, say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, that he blasphemeth, because he said, I am the Son of God? If I do not. the works of my Father, believe not; but if I do them and ye will not believe me, believe even for the works' sake, and know that I am in the Father and the Father in me. By means of the works, then, the Father will be in the Son and the Son in the Father, and thus by means of the works we understand that the Father and the Son are one. With such insistence did he bring all this to light, to the intent that we should believe there are two, albeit in one act of power, because it would be impossible to believe there is a Son otherwise than if we believe there were two.

23. After this Martha, confessing him to be the Son of God, was no more astray than Peter and Nathanael : though also if she had been astray she would at once have learned the truth. For the Lord, for the raising up of her brother from the dead, looked up to heaven and to the Father and said, Father - evidently a son speaks - I thank thee that thou hearest me always: for the sake of these multitudes that stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me. Also at the troubling of his soul: And what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour? Yet for this cause came I unto this hour. But, Father, glorify thy name. And the Son was in that name: I am come, he says, in my Father's name. Thereafter - of course the Son's word to the Father would have been enough - behold, of superfluity the Father answers the Son from heaven; and as he had already testified, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him, so here again he says, I have both glorified it and will glorify it again. How many Persons do you think there are, self-opinionated Praxeas, if not as many as there are voices? You have the Son on earth, you have the Father in heaven. That is no separation, but a divine ordinance. Yet we know that God is even within the depths, and takes up his position everywhere - though in function and power - and that the Son also, as inseparable, is with him everywhere. Yet in the economy itself it was the Father's will that the Son should be regarded as on earth, but himself in heaven. And thither also the Son looked up and prayed and made request of the Father - where also he taught us to lift ourselves up and pray, Our Father which art in heaven - though he is also everywhere. This the Father would have for his abode: The heaven, he says, is my throne. From this also he made the Son a little less than the angels by sending him down to earth, yet with the intention of crowning him with glory and honour by taking him back into heaven. This he was already granting him when he said, I have both glorified it and will glorify it. The Son makes request from earth, the Father makes a promise from heaven. Why do you make both Father and Son a liar? If it is the case that either the Father was speaking to the Son from heaven while being himself the Son upon earth, or that the Son was praying to the Father while being himself the Father in heaven, how is it that the Son should also, by making request of the Father, make request of himself, as he would do if the Father were the Son, or again that the Father should, by making a promise to the Son, make a promise to himself, as he would do if the Son were the Father? Though it were the case that we spoke of two divided from each other, as you put it about that we do, yet it were more tolerable to preach two divided than one chameleon god. Aid so with reference to those people the Lord next stated, This voice came not .for my sake but for your sakes, that these monarchians also may believe in both the Father and the Son, each in his own name and person and location. But once more Jesus cries and says, He that believeth in me believeth not in me but believeth in him that sent me - because through the Son does one believe in the Father, and the Father is the authority for believing the Son: And he that beholdeth me beholdeth him that sent me \- how? surely because, I have not spoken of myself, but the Father that sent me himself hath given me commandment what I shall say and what I shall speak - for, The Lord giveth me the tongue of learning, to know when 1 ought to speak - The word which I speak, even as the Father hath said unto me, so also I speak. In what sense this is said the evangelist, as being that dear disciple John, knew better than Praxeas : and consequently, himself of his own mind he says, But before the feast of the Passover Jesus, knowing that all things were delivered to him by the Father and that he was from God and was going to God. But Praxeas will have it that the Father himself came forth from himself and went away to himself, with the result that the devil put into the heart of Judas the betrayal not of the Son but of the Father himself - with no benefit either to the devil or to the heretic, since not even in respect of the Son did the devil contrive the betrayal with advantage to himself. For he who was betrayed was the Son of God who was in the Son of Man, as the scripture adds: Now is the ,Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him. What God? Evidently not the Father, but the, Word of the Father who was in the Son of Man, that is, in the flesh: and Jesus, who had already been glorified in that flesh, though but by power and word, now says, And God will glorify him in himself - that is, the Father will glorify the Son, whom, because he had him in himself though brought low to earth, he did shortly afterwards by the conquest of death glorify through the resurrection.

24. Clearly there were some who even then did not understand for Thomas, for a while unbelieving, says, Lord, we know not whither thou goest, and how know we the way? And Jesus said, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no one cometh unto the Father but by me: if ye had known me ye would have known the Father also: but from henceforth ye know him and have seen him. And now we come to Philip, who, bestirred by the hope of seeing the Father, and not understanding in what sense he had been told that the Father had been seen, says, Shew us the Father and it sufficeth us: and the Lord said, Philip, am I so long time with you and ye do not know me? As who does he say he ought to have been known by them? For this alone calls for discussion. As the Father, or as the Son? If as the Father, let Praxeas tell us how Christ, having companied so long time with them, could ever, I say not be understood to be the Father, but even be thought to be. To us all the scriptures predetermine, the old the Christ of God, the new the Son of God. This was preached aforetime, this was stated also by Christ himself, yea now also by the Father himself openly from heaven confessing the Son and glorifying the Son - This is my Son, and, I have glorified and will glorify. This also was believed by the disciples, this also was not believed by the Jews. Wishing them to believe him to be this he at every hour named the Father and set forth the Father and honoured the Father. If that is so, it was not the Father who they did not know had companied so long time with them but the Son: and the Lord, upbraiding them for not knowing himself as him whom they had not known, clearly wished to be recognised as he whom he had upbraided them for not recognising in so long a time, namely the Son. And now it can appear in what sense it was said, He that seeth me seeth the Father also : of course in the same sense as above, I and the Father are one. Why? Because, I came forth and am come from God ; and, I am the way, no one cometh unto the Father but by me ; and, No one cometh unto me except the Father have drawn him ; and, All things hath the Father delivered to me ; and, As the Father quickeneth, so also the Son ; and, If ye know me ye know the Father also. For according to these texts he had revealed himself as the deputy of the Father, by means of whom the Father was both seen in acts and heard in words and known in the Son ministering the Father's acts and words: because the Father is invisible, a fact which Philip also had learned in the Law and ought to have remembered - No one shall see God and live. And consequently he is chidden for desiring to see the Father as though he were visible, and is informed that he becomes visible in the Son, in consequence of acts of power, not in consequence of actual manifestation of his Person. Further, if by saying He that seeth me seeth the Father, he wished the identity of Father and Son to be understood, why does he add, Believest thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in me? For he ought to have added, Believest thou not that I am the Father? Or why did he enlarge upon it, except that he made that clear which he wished them to understand, namely that he was the Son? Further, in saying Believest thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in me, he enlarged upon it for this reason rather, lest, on the ground that he had said He that hath seen me hath seen the Father also, he might be thought to be the Father: and this he never wished to be thought to be, for he always professed to be the Son, and to have come from the Father. Therefore he also made manifest the conjunction of the two Persons, so that the Father separately might not, as though visible, be asked for in open view, and that the Son might be accepted as he who makes the Father present. And no less did he explain this also, in what manner the Father was in the Son and the Son in the Father: The words, he says, that I speak unto you ,are not mine \- evidently because they are the Father's - but the Father abiding in me doeth the works. Therefore the Father, abiding in the Son through works of power and words of doctrine, is seen through those things through which he abides, and through him in whom he abides: and from this very fact it is apparent that each Person is himself and none other, while he says, I am in the Father and the Father in me. And so he says, Believe. What? That I am the Father? I think it is not so written, but, That I am in the Father and the Father in me, or if not, believe for the very works' sake - those works in fact through which the Father was seen in the Son, not with the eyes but with the mind.

25. After Philip and the whole context of that question, the things which follow down to the end of the gospel continue in the same kind of discourse, in which the Father and the Son are distinguished as being each himself. He promises that when he has ascended to the Father he will also request of the Father the Paraclete, and will send him, specifying another. But we have already explained in what sense the means "another". Moreover he says, He will take of mine, as I myself have taken of the Father's. So the close series of the Father in the Son and the Son in the Paraclete makes three who cohere, the one attached to the other: And these three are one thing, not one person, in the sense in which it was said, I and the Father are one, in respect of unity of substance, not of singularity of number. Take a further quick glance, and you will find that he whom you believe to be the Father is called the Father's vine, and the Father the husbandman, just as you will find that he who you think was on earth was by the Son acknowledged to be in heaven when he lifted up his eyes there and commended his disciples to the Father. But although in this gospel there is no revelation of My God, why hast thou forsaken me? or of Father, in thy hands I lay down my spirit, yet after the resurrection and the glory of the conquest of death, when, he has put off from him the necessity of any humility and now could show himself as the Father to that faithful woman who attempted to touch him as a result of affection and not of curiosity nor of Thomas's unbelief, he says, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, but go to my brethren - and even in this he shows himself the Son, for he would have called them his sons if he had been the Father - and tell them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, my God and your God. Father to Father, and God to God? Or Son to Father, and Word to God? Also what reason does the very conclusion of the gospel set as the seal upon these things that are written, except, That ye may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God ? Therefore whatever of these things you have thought were able to be of advantage to you for the demonstration of the identity of Father and Son, you are striving against the express judgement of the gospel: for the things were written, not that you may believe that Jesus Christ is the Father, but that you may believe that he is the Son.

26. On account of Philip's one remark and the Lord's reply to it we seem to have made a complete study of John's gospel, so that so many things clearly stated both before it and after it may not be overturned by one remark, which ought to be inter- preted in accordance with them all, not in contradiction with them all and even in contradiction with its own meaning. But, so as not to lodge as evidence other gospels which by relating the Lord's nativity confirm our faith, it is enough that he who was to be born of the virgin was by the angel messenger himself defined as the Son of God: The Spirit of God shall come upon thee and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee, wherefore that which shall be born of thee shall be called holy, the Son of God. They will wish to quibble even here, but the truth will prevail. "Doubtless ", say they, "the Son of God is God, and the power of the Most High is the Most High ", and they are not ashamed to assume that which, if it had been so, would have been so written. For, consideration for whom prevented him from openly stating, God shall come upon thee and the Most High shall overshadow thee? For when he said The Spirit of God, although God is spirit, yet since he did not mention God in the nominative case he wished there to be understood an assignment of the whole which was to go to the Son's account. This Spirit of God will be the same as the Word. For as, when John says The Word was made flesh, we understand also Spirit at the mention of the Word, so also here we recognise also the Word under the name of the Spirit. For spirit is the substance of the Word, and word is an operation of the Spirit, and the two are one thing. Otherwise there will be one whom John declares to have been made flesh, and another who the angel says will be flesh, if it is not the case that both the Spirit is the Word and the Word is the Spirit. As therefore the Word of God is not God himself whose Word he is, so the Spirit also, though he is called God, is yet not God himself whose Spirit he is called. Nothing in genitive dependence is that on which it is dependent. Clearly when a thing is "from him", and is "his" in the sense that it is from him, it can be a thing which is like him from whom it is and whose it is: and consequently the Spirit is God and the Word is God, because he is from God, yet is not God himself from whom he is. But if the Spirit of God, as being a substantive thing, will not be found to be God himself, but in that sense God as being from the substance of God himself, in that it is a substantive thing and a certain assignment of the whole, much more so the power of the Most High will not be the Most High himself, because it is not even a substantive thing as the Spirit is, any more than wisdom or providence: for these are not sub- stances, but attributes of each several substance. Power is an attribute of spirit, and will not itself be spirit. Since then these, whatever they are, the Spirit of God and his Word and his power, were conferred upon the virgin, that which is born of her is the Son of God. This in these gospels he himself testifies that he is, immediately, as a boy: Know ye not, he says, that I must be in my Father's house\ ? This also Satan knew at the temptations If thou art the Son of God. This also later the devils confess: We know thee who thou art, the Son of God. He himself prays to the Father. When Peter recognises him as the Christ of God he does not deny it. When he rejoices in the Spirit he says to the Father, I thank thee, Father, that thou hast hid these things from the wise. In the same passage also he affirms that the Father is known to none but the Son, and that the Son of the Father will in the presence of the Father confess them that confess him and deny them that deny him, while he introduces the parable of a son, not a father, who was sent into a vineyard after a number of servants had been sent and was killed by wicked rustics and avenged by his father : and he even himself knows not the last day or hour, which is known to the Father alone : and he ordains for his disciples a kingdom even as he says one has been ordained for him by his Father : and he has power to ask his Father for legions of angels to help him, if he wished : and he cries aloud that God has forsaken him, and places his spirit in the Father's hands, and after the resurrection pledges himself to send to his disciples the promise of the Father, and, lastly, commands them to baptize unto the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, not unto one only: for not once, but thrice, are we baptized, unto each several Person at each several name.

27. But why shall I delay over things so evident, when I ought to be attacking those arguments by which they seek to cast darkness over these evident things? For, convicted on all sides by the distinctness of the Father and the Son, which we say is ordained without disturbing the permanence of the union as of the sun and the beam and of the spring and the river, they attempt to interpret this distinctness in another way, not less in accordance with their opinion, so as no less than before to distinguish Father and Son both in one person, while they say that the Son is the flesh, that is, the Man, Jesus, while the Father is the Spirit, that is, God, Christ. These who contend that the Father and the Son are one and the same, now begin to divide them rather than to call them one. For if Jesus is one and Christ is another, the Son will be one and the Father another, because Jesus is the Son and Christ is the Father. This sort of monarchy they perhaps, learned of from Valentinus, to make two of Jesus and Christ. But this assumption of theirs has already had its point blunted by our previous discussion, because he whom they make the Father is described as the Word of God, or the Spirit of God and the power of the Most High: for these are not he to whom they are described as belonging, but are from him and belong to him. Yet they will be refuted also in another way in that text. " Behold", they say, " it was announced by the angel, Therefore that which shall be born of thee shall be called holy, the Son of God : and so it was flesh that was born, and so the flesh will be the Son of God." And yet the statement was made concerning the Spirit of God. For certainly it was of the Holy Spirit that the virgin conceived, and what she conceived that she brought to birth. Therefore that must have been born which was conceived and was to be brought to birth, that is, the Spirit, whose name also shall be called Emmanuel, which is interpreted, God with us. But flesh is not God, that of it should be said, It shall be called holy, the Son of God; but he who as God was born in it, of whom also the psalm speaks, Because God as man was born in her and hath builded her by the will of the Father. Who, being God, was born in her? The Word, and the Spirit who with the Word was born by the Father's will. Therefore the Word is in flesh; while we must also enquire about this, how the Word was made flesh, whether as transformed into flesh or as having clothed himself with flesh. Certainly as having clothed himself. God however must necessarily be believed to be immutable and untransformable, as being eternal. But change of form is a destruction of what was there first: for everything that is transformed into something else ceases to be what it was and begins to be what it was not. But God neither ceases to be, nor can be anything else. And the Word is God, and the Word of God abideth for ever, evidently by continuing in his own form. Anal if it is not feasible for him to be conformed to something else, it follows that he must be understood to have been made flesh in the sense that he comes to be in flesh, and is manifested and seen and handled by means of the flesh : because the other considerations also demand this acceptation. For if the Word was made flesh as the result of a transformation or mutation of substance, Jesus will then be one substance composed of two, flesh and spirit, a kind of mixture, as electrum is composed of gold and silver: and he begins to be neither gold (that is, spirit) nor silver (that is, flesh), seeing that the one thing is changed by the other and a third thing is brought into being. In that case Jesus will not be God, for he has ceased to be the Word, since it has become flesh: neither will his manhood be flesh, for it is not properly flesh, seeing it has been the Word. Thus out of both things there is neither: there is some third thing far other than both. Yet we find that he is, not in genitive dependence, set forth as both God and Man, the psalm itself making this suggestion, Because God as man was born in her, he hath builded her by the will of the Father: certainly we find him set forth as in every respect Son of God and Son of man, since we find him as both God and Man, without doubt according to each substance as it is distinct in what itself is, because neither is the Word anything else but God nor the flesh anything else but man. Thus also the apostle teaches of both his substances: Who was made, he says, of the seed of David - here he will be man, and Son of Man: Who was defined as Son of God according to the Spirit - here he will be God, and the Word, . the Son of God: we observe a double quality, not confused but combined, Jesus in one Person God and Man. I postpone the consideration of "Christ". And to such a degree did there remain unimpaired the proper being of each substance, that in him the Spirit carried out its own acts, that is powers and works and signs, while the flesh accomplished its own passions, hungering in company of the devil, thirsting in company of the Samaritan woman, weeping for Lazarus, sore troubled unto death - and at length it also died. But if there had been some third thing, a confusion of both, like electrum, there would not be in evidence such distinct proofs of both substances; but the Spirit would have performed the functions of the flesh and the flesh the functions of the Spirit, by interchange, or else neither those of the flesh nor those of the Spirit but those of some third form, by confusion: yes, either the Word would have died or the flesh would not have died, if the Word had been converted into flesh, for either the flesh would have been immortal or the Word mortal. But because both substances acted distinctively each in its own quality, therefore to them accrued both their own activities and their own destinies. Learn therefore with Nicodemus that what is born in the flesh is flesh and what is born of the Spirit is spirit. Flesh does not become spirit nor spirit flesh: evidently they can both be in one person. Of these Jesus is composed, of flesh as Man and of spirit as God: and on that occasion the angel, in respect of that part in which he was spirit, pronounced him the Son of God, reserving for the flesh the designation Son of Man. Thus also the apostle, in calling him even the mediator of God and of man, confirms the fact that he is of both substances. Lastly, you who interpret " Son of God" as the flesh, show me who the Son of Man may be. Or is he to be the Spirit? But you wish the Spirit to be taken to be the Father himself, since God is spirit as though, just as the Word is God, God's Spirit might not also be God's Word.

28. And so you make Christ into the Father, you great fool, because you do not even examine the very force of this name, if indeed " Christ" is a name and not rather a title: for it signifies "anointed ". Yet "anointed" is no more a name than "clothed" or "shod ", but is something attributive to a name. If as a result of some quibbling Jesus were also called "clothed", as he is called Christ from the sacrament of anointing, would you, as you do here, call Jesus the Son of God but believe "clothed" to be the Father? Now concerning "Christ". If the Father is Christ, the Father is anointed, and by some one else at that: or if by himself, prove it. But that is not the teaching of the Acts of the Apostles in that cry of the church to God, For in this city have all assembled together, Herod and Pilate with the gentiles, against thy holy Son whom thou hast anointed. Thus they testified both that Jesus is the Son of God and that the Son was anointed by the Father: consequently Jesus will be the same as Christ who was anointed by the Father, not the same as the Father who anointed the Son. So also Peter: Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made both Lord and Christ - that is, anointed - this Jesus whom ye crucified. But John even brands as a liar him who has denied that Jesus is Christ, and in contrast says that every one who believes that Jesus is Christ is born of God for which reason he also exhorts us to believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, so that, he says, we may have fellowship with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. Thus also Paul in every place puts God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ: when he writes to the Romans he gives thanks to God through our Lord Jesus Christ ; when to the Galatians he represents himself as an apostle, not from men nor through man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father. And you have, throughout all his collected works, texts which make statements in this manner and set forth as two God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, and say that Jesus himself is Christ, and, under another name also, the Son of God. For continually, by that right by which both names belong to one, that is, the Son of God, one even without the other belongs to the same one: and if "Jesus" alone is written "Christ" also is understood because Jesus was anointed; while if only "Christ" is written, the same is also Jesus because the anointed is Jesus. And of these names one is a proper name which was conferred by the angel, while the other as an attributive accrues from the anointing, yet only so long as Christ is the Son and not the Father. Finally, how blind is the man who does not understand that if he ascribes the name of Christ to the Father the presage of another god is implied in the name of Christ. For if Christ the Father is God who says; I ascend to my Father and your Father and my God and your God, evidently he reveals another father and god above himself. Also if the Father is Christ, there is another who stablisheth the thunder and createth the spirit and announceth unto men his Christ. And if the kings of the earth are stood up and the rulers are gathered together into one against the Lord and against his Christ there will be another lord against whose Christ the kings and rulers are gathered together. And if Thus saith the Lord to my Lord Christ, there will be another lord who is speaking to Christ the Father. And when the apostle writes, That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ may give you the Spirit, of wisdom and knowledge, there will be another god of Jesus Christ, the bestower of spiritual gifts. Certainly, so as not to wander over the whole ground, he who raised up Christ and is also to raise up our mortal bodies, will be as it were another raiser up than the Father who died and the Father who was raised up, if it is the case that Christ who died is the Father.

29. Let this blasphemy be silent, be silent. Let it be enough to say that Christ the Son of God died, and this only because it is so written. For the apostle, while stating not without risk that Christ died, adds According to the scriptures, so as by the authority of the scriptures to soften the hardness of the state- ment and avert offence to the hearer. And yet, since in Christ Jesus there are assessed two substances, a divine and a human, and it is admitted that the divine is immortal, as that that which is human is mortal, it is evident in what respect he says he died, namely in that he is flesh and man and Son of Man, not in that he is spirit and Word and Son of God. By saying then that Christ - that is, the anointed - died, he makes it clear that that which was anointed died, that is, the flesh. "So", you say, "we also who, by the same reasoning as you, say that the Son died, do not blaspheme against the Lord God ; for we say that he died not in respect of his divine but of his human substance." Yet you do blaspheme, not only because you say the Father died but also because you say he was crucified. For by converting Christ into the Father you blaspheme against the Father with that curse upon one crucified which by the Law accrues to the Son, because it was Christ, not the Father, who was made a curse for us. Whereas we, when we say that Christ was crucified, curse him not, but relate the curse of the Law, because neither did the apostle blaspheme when he said this. But just as a thing said of anyone of whom it may appropriately be said is said without blasphemy, so what is not appropriate is blasphemy if it is said. Consequently neither did the Father suffer with the Son. In fact because they are ashamed of direct blasphemy against the Father, they hope it may in this manner be mitigated, while they now admit that Father and Son are two if indeed in this fashion the Son suffers while the Father suffers with him. In this also are they fools. For what is "compassion" except "suffering with" another? Further, if the Father is impassible he is of course incompassible or if he is compassible he is of course passible. So you do him no benefit by this fear of yours. For you fear to call passible him whom you do call compassible. But the Father is just as incompassible as the Son also is impassible as regards that state in which he is God. "But in what way did the Son suffer, if the Father also did not suffer with him?" The difference begins from the Son, not from the Father. For also if a river is defiled by some muddying, although the one substance comes down from the spring and there is no interruption at the spring, yet the malady of the river will not attach to the spring: and though the water which suffers injury belongs to the spring, so long as it suffers not in the spring but in the river it is not the spring that suffers, but the river which Chas comet from the spring. So also how could the Spirit of God suffer in the Son? On the ground that the Spirit was suffering not in the Father but in the Son, would it seem that the Father had not suffered? But it is enough that the Spirit of God suffered nothing on his own account: because if he did suffer anything in the Son there was a possibility of the Father suffering with the Son, in the flesh. But this has already been discussed, and no one will deny our conclusion: since neither can we suffer on behalf of God except there be in us the Spirit of God, who also speaks concerning us the things which belong to our confessorship, while himself not suffering; I but granting us the ability to suffer.

30. Otherwise, if you will persist further, I shall be able to give you a harder answer and to put you in conflict with the statement of the Lord himself, so as to say, Why do you ask questions about that answer? You have him crying aloud at his passion, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Consequently either the Son was suffering, forsaken by the Father, and the Father did not suffer, seeing he had forsaken the Son: or else, if it was the Father who was suffering, to what God was he crying aloud? But this utterance of flesh and soul (that is, of the manhood), not of the Word and Spirit (that is, not of God), was sent forth with the express purpose of showing the impassibility of God who thus forsook the Son when he delivered his manhood to death. This was in the apostle's mind when he wrote, If the Father spared not his Son. This also Isaiah, an earlier authority stated: And the Lord hath delivered him for our iniquities. He forsook in that he did not spare, he forsook in that he delivered. Yet the Father did not forsake the Son, since the Son placed his own spirit in the Father's hands. He placed it there in short, and straightway died: for while the spirit remains in the flesh the flesh cannot die at all. Thus, to be forsaken by the Father was to the Son death. The Son therefore both dies and is raised up again by the Father according to the scriptures. The Son ascended into the higher parts of heaven, as he did also descend into the inner parts of the earth. This is he who sitteth at the right hand of the Father, not the Father at his own right hand. This is he whom Stephen sees, when he is being stoned, still standing at the right hand of God, as thenceforth to sit, until the Father do put aller his feet. This is he who is also to come again above the clouds of heaven in like fashion as also he ascended. This is he who meanwhile has poured forth the gift which he has received from the Father, the Holy Spirit, the third name of the deity and the third sequence of the majesty, the preacher of one monarchy and also the interpreter of the economy for those who admit the words of his new prophecy, and the leader into all the truth which is in the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit according to the Christian mystery.

31. Moreover this matter is of Jewish faith, so to believe in one God as to refuse to count in with him the Son, and after the Son the Spirit. For what difference will there be between us and them except that disagreement? What need is there of the Gospel, what is that confidence of the New Testament which establishes the Law and the Prophets until John, unless thereafter Father and Son and Spirit, believed in as three, constitute one God? It was God's will to make a new covenant for the very purpose that in a new way his unity might be believed in through the Son and the Spirit, so that God who had aforetime been preached through the Son and the Spirit without being under stood might now be known in his own proper names and persons. Therefore let them beware, these antichrists who deny the Father and the Son : for they do deny the Father while they identify him with the Son, and they deny the Son while they identify him with the Father, granting them things they are not and taking away things they are. But he who shall confess that Christ is the Son of God - not the Father - God abideth in him and he in God. We believe the testimony of God by which he hath testified concerning his Son: He that hath not the Son hath not life. But he has not the Son who believes him to be other than the Son.
